Fsdp advanced tutorial (#1959)
pytorch/tutorials: intermediate_source/FSDP_adavnced_tutorial.rst

Advanced Fully Sharded Data Parallel(FSDP) Tutorial
=====================================================

> **Author**: `Hamid Shojanazeri <https://github.com/HamidShojanazeri>`__, `Less Wright <https://github.com/lessw2020>`__,  `Yanli Zhao <https://github.com/zhaojuanmao>`__,  `Rohan Varma <https://github.com/rohan-varma/>`__

Author: @svekars Thanks a lot for your editorial suggestions, can you please elaborate a bit on 80 chars, is this about the title? it seems to be 51 chars.

> **Author**: `Hamid Shojanazeri <https://github.com/HamidShojanazeri>`__, `Less Wright <https://github.com/lessw2020>`__,  `Yanli Zhao <https://github.com/zhaojuanmao>`__,  `Rohan Varma <https://github.com/rohan-varma/>`__

Reviewer: Hamid, it is not about the title specifically but in general to keep the length of lines under 80 chars for better readability. Thank you!

> **Author**: `Hamid Shojanazeri <https://github.com/HamidShojanazeri>`__, `Less Wright <https://github.com/lessw2020>`__,  `Yanli Zhao <https://github.com/zhaojuanmao>`__,  `Rohan Varma <https://github.com/rohan-varma/>`__

Reviewer: If you are using vim, this seems to be the best solution:
1. `vi <file>`
2. `:set textwidth=80`
3. Press `v` to switch to VISUAL mode
4. Press `gg` to get to the begging of the file.
5. `gq` or `gq + ENTER`
6. Move through the file to fix all paragraphs. If some links or code run beyond 80 chars, it's fine.

You could try to run `gqG` but it breaks the output for me.

This tutorial introduces more advanced features of Fully Sharded Data Parallel (FSDP) as part of the PyTorch 1.12 release. To get familiar with FSDP, please refer to the `FSDP getting started tutorial <https://pytorch.org/tutorials/intermediate/FSDP_tutorial.html>`__.

In this tutorial, we fine-tune a HuggingFace (HF) T5 model with FSDP for text summarization as a working example. 

> The example uses Wikihow and for simplicity, we will showcase the training on a single node, P4dn instance with 8, A100 GPUs. We will soon have a blog post on large scale FSDP training on a multi-node cluster, please stay tuned for that on the PyTorch medium channel.

Reviewer 2: nit: no comma after "8"

FSDP is a production ready package with focus on ease of use, performance, and long-term support. 
One of the main benefits of FSDP is reducing the memory footprint on each GPU. This enables training of larger models with lower total memory vs DDP, and leverages the overlap of computation and communication to train models efficiently. 

> This reduced memory pressure helps to fit larger batch sizes during training, and ideally, positively impact the training speed and cost. 

Reviewer 2: maybe "This reduced memory pressure can be leveraged to either train larger models or increase batch size, potentially helping overall training throughput."

You can read more about PyTorch FSDP `here <https://pytorch.org/blog/introducing-pytorch-fully-sharded-data-parallel-api/>`__.

FSDP Features in This Tutorial
--------------
* Transformer Auto Wrap Policy
* Mixed Precision
* Initializing FSDP Model on Device
* Sharding Strategy
* Backward Prefetch
* Model Checkpoint Saving via Streaming to CPU

Recap on How FSDP Works
--------------

At a high level FDSP works as follow:

*In constructor*

* Shard model parameters and each rank only keeps its own shard

*In forward pass*

* Run `all_gather` to collect all shards from all ranks to recover the full parameter for this FSDP unit
* Run forward computation
* Discard non-owned parameter shards it has just collected to free memory

*In backward pass*

* Run `all_gather` to collect all shards from all ranks to recover the full parameter in this FSDP unit
* Run backward computation
* Run reduce_scatter to sync gradients

> * Discard non-owned parameters to free memory. 

Reviewer 2: I believe this happens before the reduce_scatter, or at least it should - i can verify in the code

Author: @rohan-varma sure that would be great to confirm if "Discard non-owned parameters to free memory" is happening before reduce_scatter.

Reviewer 2: Confirmed!

1.3  Import necessary packages

.. code-block:: python

    import os
    import argparse
    import torch
    import torch.nn as nn
    import torch.nn.functional as F
    import torch.optim as optim
    from transformers import T5Tokenizer, T5ForConditionalGeneration
    import functools
    from torch.optim.lr_scheduler import StepLR
    import torch.nn.functional as F
    import torch.distributed as dist
    import torch.multiprocessing as mp
    from torch.nn.parallel import DistributedDataParallel as DDP
    from torch.utils.data.distributed import DistributedSampler
    from torch.distributed.fsdp.fully_sharded_data_parallel import (
        FullyShardedDataParallel as FSDP,
        CPUOffload,
        BackwardPrefetch,
    )
    from torch.distributed.fsdp.wrap import (
    transformer_auto_wrap_policy,
    enable_wrap,
    wrap,
    )
    from torch.utils.data import DataLoader
    from pathlib import Path
    from summerization_dataset import *
    from transformers.models.t5.modeling_t5 import T5Block
    from typing import Type

1.4 Distributed training setup. 

> As we mentioned, FSDP uses both data and model parallelism, which requires a distributed training environment.  Here we use two helper functions to initialize the processes for distributed training,  and then to clean up after training completion.

Reviewer 2: I don't see how FSDP uses model parallelism in this example?

In this tutorial, we are going to use torch elastic, using `torchrun <https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/elastic/run.html>`__ , which will set the worker RANK and WORLD_SIZE automatically for us.

.. code-block:: python

    def setup():
        # initialize the process group
        dist.init_process_group("nccl")

    def cleanup():
        dist.destroy_process_group()

> 2.1  Setup the HuggingFace T5 model. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2.1  Set up the HuggingFace T5 model:
```

                f"Train Epoch: \t{epoch}, Loss: \t{train_accuracy:.4f}"
            )
        return train_accuracy

2.3 Define a validation function 

.. code-block:: python

    def validation(model, rank, world_size, val_loader):
        model.eval()
        correct = 0
        local_rank = int(os.environ['LOCAL_RANK'])
        fsdp_loss = torch.zeros(3).to(local_rank)
        with torch.no_grad():
            for batch in val_loader:
                for key in batch.keys():
                    batch[key] = batch[key].to(local_rank)
                output = model(input_ids=batch["source_ids"],attention_mask=batch["source_mask"],labels=batch["target_ids"])
                fsdp_loss[0] += output["loss"].item()  # sum up batch loss
                pred = output["logits"].argmax(dim=1, keepdim=True)  # get the index of the max log-probability

                fsdp_loss[1] += pred.eq(batch["target_ids"].view_as(pred)).sum().item()
                fsdp_loss[2] += len(batch)

        dist.all_reduce(fsdp_loss, op=dist.ReduceOp.SUM)

        if rank == 0:
            val_loss = fsdp_loss[0] / fsdp_loss[2]
            print(f"Validation Loss: {val_loss:.4f}")
        return val_loss

> 2.4 Define a distributed train function that wraps the model in FSDP

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2.4 Define a distributed train function that wraps the model in FSDP:
```

        sampler2 = DistributedSampler(val_dataset, rank=rank, num_replicas=world_size)

        setup()

        train_kwargs = {'batch_size': args.batch_size, 'sampler': sampler1}
        test_kwargs = {'batch_size': args.test_batch_size, 'sampler': sampler2}
        cuda_kwargs = {'num_workers': 2,
                        'pin_memory': True,
                        'shuffle': False}
        train_kwargs.update(cuda_kwargs)
        test_kwargs.update(cuda_kwargs)

        train_loader = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(train_dataset,**train_kwargs)
        val_loader = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(val_dataset, **test_kwargs)
        
        t5_auto_wrap_policy = functools.partial(
            transformer_auto_wrap_policy,
            transformer_layer_cls={
                T5Block,
            },
        )

        sharding_strategy: ShardingStrategy = ShardingStrategy.FULL_SHARD
        torch.cuda.set_device(local_rank)
    
    
        init_start_event = torch.cuda.Event(enable_timing=True)
        init_end_event = torch.cuda.Event(enable_timing=True)

        init_start_event.record()

    

>         model = FSDP(model,

Reviewer 2: possibly add comments to indicate what each argument is doing?

            auto_wrap_policy=t5_auto_wrap_policy,
            mixed_precision=bfSixteen,
            sharding_strategy=sharding_strategy,
            device_id=torch.cuda.current_device())

>         print(model)

Reviewer 2: add a comment saying the model's wrapping can be observed simply via print()?

            if args.run_validation:
                curr_val_loss = validation(model, rank, world_size, val_loader)
            scheduler.step()
            
            if rank == 0:

                print(f"--> epoch {epoch} completed...entering save and stats zone")

                dur.append(time.time() - t0)
                train_acc_tracking.append(train_accuracy.item())

                if args.run_validation:
                    val_acc_tracking.append(curr_val_loss.item())

                if args.track_memory:
                    mem_alloc_tracker.append(
                        format_metrics_to_gb(torch.cuda.memory_allocated())
                    )
                    mem_reserved_tracker.append(
                        format_metrics_to_gb(torch.cuda.memory_reserved())
                    )

        init_end_event.record()

        if rank == 0:
            print(f"Cuda event elapsed time: {init_start_event.elapsed_time(init_end_event) / 1000}sec")
            print(f"{model}")

        if args.save_model and curr_val_loss < best_val_loss:

            # save
            if rank == 0:
                print(f"--> entering save model state...")

>             save_policy = FullStateDictConfig(offload_to_cpu=True, rank0_only=True)

Reviewer 2: maybe add a comment explaining this?

            with FSDP.state_dict_type(
                model, StateDictType.FULL_STATE_DICT, save_policy
            ):

>                 cpu_state = model.state_dict()

Reviewer 2: possibly add optimizer state checkpointing as well?

Author: @rohan-varma it is waiting for the final fix yet.

            print(f"saving process: rank {rank}  done w state_dict")

            if rank == 0:
                print(f"--> saving model ...")
                currEpoch = (
                    "-" + str(epoch) + "-" + str(round(curr_val_loss.item(), 4)) + ".pt"
                )
                save_name = file_save_name + "-" + time_of_run + "-" + currEpoch

                torch.save(cpu_state, save_name)
        if curr_val_loss < best_val_loss:

                best_val_loss = curr_val_loss
                if rank==0:
                    print(f"-->>>> New Val Loss Record: {best_val_loss}")
        
        cleanup()

> 2.5 Finally parsing the arguments and setting the main function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2.5 Parse the arguments and set the main function:
```

                        help='Learning rate step gamma (default: 0.7)')
    parser.add_argument('--no-cuda', action='store_true', default=False,
                        help='disables CUDA training')
    parser.add_argument('--seed', type=int, default=1, metavar='S',
                        help='random seed (default: 1)')
    parser.add_argument('--track_memory', action='store_true', default=False,
                        help='track the gpy memory')
    parser.add_argument('--run_validation', action='store_true', default=False,
                        help='running the validation')
    parser.add_argument('--activation_checkpointing', action='store_true', default=False,
                        help='Checkpoint activations')
    parser.add_argument('--save-model', action='store_true', default=False,
                        help='For Saving the current Model')
    args = parser.parse_args()

    torch.manual_seed(args.seed)
    
    fsdp_main(args)

To run the the training using torchrun:

.. code-block:: bash 

    torchrun --nnodes 1 --nproc_per_node 4  T5_training.py

.. _transformer_wrapping_policy:
Transformer Wrapping Policy
--------------

> As discussed in the `previous tutorial <https://pytorch.org/tutorials/intermediate/FSDP_tutorial.html>`__, fsdp_auto_wrap_policy is one of the FSDP features that make it easy to automatically shard a given model and put the model, optimizer and gradient shards into distinct FSDP units.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As discussed in the `previous tutorial <https://pytorch.org/tutorials/intermediate/FSDP_tutorial.html>`__, `fsdp_auto_wrap_policy` is one of the FSDP features that make it easy to automatically shard a given model and put the model, optimizer, and gradient shards into distinct FSDP units.
```

> As discussed in the `previous tutorial <https://pytorch.org/tutorials/intermediate/FSDP_tutorial.html>`__, fsdp_auto_wrap_policy is one of the FSDP features that make it easy to automatically shard a given model and put the model, optimizer and gradient shards into distinct FSDP units.

Reviewer 2: nit: in 1.12, it has been changed fsdp_auto_wrap_policy -> auto_wrap_policy

> For some architectures such as Transformer encoder-decoders, some part of the model such as embedding table is being shared with both encoder and decoder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For some architectures such as Transformer encoder-decoders, some part of the model, such as embedding table, is being shared with both encoder and decoder.
```

> For some architectures such as Transformer encoder-decoders, some part of the model such as embedding table is being shared with both encoder and decoder.

Reviewer 2: some part -> some parts

> In this case, we need to place the embedding table in the outer FSDP unit so that it could be accessed from both encoder and decoder.  In addition, by registering the layer class for a transformer, the sharding plan can be made much more communication efficient.  In Pytorch 1.12, FSDP added this support and now we have a wrapping policy for transfomers.

Reviewer 2: Add something like "As of PyTorch 1.12, shared parameters such as this shared embedding table must be placed in the same FSDP unit, so all parameters which point to this embedding table must be part of the same FSDP unit".

Author: @rohan-varma , I wonder if this is different from having shared parameters in the outer FSDP unit, that could be accessed by other parts of the model?

> In this case, we need to place the embedding table in the outer FSDP unit so that it could be accessed from both encoder and decoder.  In addition, by registering the layer class for a transformer, the sharding plan can be made much more communication efficient.  In Pytorch 1.12, FSDP added this support and now we have a wrapping policy for transfomers.

Reviewer 2: Pytorch -> PyTorch

.. code-block:: python

    t5_auto_wrap_policy = functools.partial(
            transformer_auto_wrap_policy,
            transformer_layer_cls={
                T5Block,
            },
        )
    torch.cuda.set_device(local_rank)
  

    model = FSDP(model,
        fsdp_auto_wrap_policy=t5_auto_wrap_policy)

To see the wrapped model, you can easily print the model and visually inspect the sharding and FSDP units as well.

Mixed Precision
--------------
FSDP supports training with mixed precision any combination of FP16 and BFloat16 and FP32. Currently BFloat16 is only available on Ampere GPUs, so you need to confirm native support before you use it. On V100s for example, BFloat16 can still be run but due to it running non-natively, it can result in significant slowdowns.

To check if BFloat16 is natively supported, you can use the following :

.. code-block:: python
    
    bf16_ready = (
        torch.version.cuda
        and torch.cuda.is_bf16_supported() 
        and LooseVersion(torch.version.cuda) >= "11.0"
        and dist.is_nccl_available()
        and nccl.version() >= (2, 10)
    )

> One of the advantages of mixed percision in FSDP is providing granular control over different precision levels for parameters, gradients and buffers as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the advantages of mixed percision in FSDP is providing granular control over different precision levels for parameters, gradients, and buffers as follows:
```

.. code-block:: python

    fpSixteen = MixedPrecision(
        param_dtype=torch.float16,
        # Gradient communication precision.
        reduce_dtype=torch.float16,
        # Buffer precision.
        buffer_dtype=torch.float16,
    )

    bfSixteen = MixedPrecision(
        param_dtype=torch.bfloat16,
        # Gradient communication precision.
        reduce_dtype=torch.bfloat16,
        # Buffer precision.
        buffer_dtype=torch.bfloat16,
    )

    fp32_policy = MixedPrecision(
        param_dtype=torch.float32,
        # Gradient communication precision.
        reduce_dtype=torch.float32,
        # Buffer precision.
        buffer_dtype=torch.float32,
    )

> In 2.4 we just add the relevant mixed precision policy to the FSDP wrapper:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In 2.4, we just add the relevant mixed precision policy to the FSDP wrapper:
```

.. code-block:: python

     model = FSDP(model,
            auto_wrap_policy=t5_auto_wrap_policy,
            mixed_precision=bfSixteen)

> In our experiments, we have observed up to 4x speed up by using BFloat16 for training.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our experiments, we have observed up to 4x speed increase by using BFloat16 for training.
```

> In our experiments, we have observed up to 4x speed up by using BFloat16 for training.

Reviewer 2: Also note the memory reduction (30ish% in some experiments that can be used for batch size increase)

Intializing FSDP Model on Device

> --------------

Reviewer: ---- needs to be as long as the heading

> While there are multiple ways to initialize your model in FSDP, with 1.12 we have an optimal method for initializing most models by streaming the model layers onto the GPU to avoid any OOM issues, while at the same time leveraging the speed of the GPU to initialize many times faster vs on CPU:

Reviewer 2: mention that `device_id` moves the model from CPU to GPU

.. code-block:: python

    torch.cuda.set_device(local_rank)

     model = FSDP(model,
            auto_wrap_policy=t5_auto_wrap_policy,
            mixed_precision=bfSixteen,
            device_id=torch.cuda.current_device())
     

    
Sharding Strategy

> --------------

Reviewer: --- needs to be as long as the heading.

> FSDP sharding strategy by default is set to fully shard the model parameters, gradients and optimizer states get sharded across all ranks. (also termed Zero3 sharding). In case you are interested to have Zero2 sharding strategy, where only optimizer states and gradients are sharded, FSDP support this feature by passing the Sharding strategy by using  "ShardingStrategy.SHARD_GRAD_OP", instead of "ShardingStrategy.FULL_SHARD" to the FSDP initialization  as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the FSDP sharding strategy is set to fully shard the model parameters, gradients, and optimizer states get distributed across all ranks, also known as Zero3 sharding. If you want to use the Zero2 sharding strategy, where only optimizer states and gradients are sharded, FSDP supports this feature by passing the Sharding strategy by using  `ShardingStrategy.SHARD_GRAD_OP`, instead of `ShardingStrategy.FULL_SHARD` to the FSDP initialization  as follows:
```

.. code-block:: python

    torch.cuda.set_device(local_rank)

     model = FSDP(model,
            auto_wrap_policy=t5_auto_wrap_policy,
            mixed_precision=bfSixteen,
            device_id=torch.cuda.current_device(),
            sharding_strategy=ShardingStrategy.SHARD_GRAD_OP # FULL_SHARD)

> This will reduce the communication overhead in FSDP since model paramaters are duplicated rather than communicated, with the trade off of a higher memory footprint. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will reduce the communication overhead in FSDP since model paramaters are duplicated rather than communicated, with the trade-off of a higher memory footprint. 
```

Backward Prefetch

> --------------

Reviewer: --- needs to be as long as the heading.

> This will reduce the communication overhead in FSDP since model paramaters are duplicated rather than communicated, with the trade off of a higher memory footprint. 

Reviewer 2: AFAIK this is not completely the case, what actually happens is that we hold full parameters after forward and through the backwards pass.

This saves an all_gather during backwards so there is less comm. at the cost of a higher memory footprint, as mentioned. I think we should make the distinction that full model params are freed at the end of backwards and need to be re-allgathered in our version of zero2.

> Backward prefetch setting controls the timing of when the next FSDP unit's parameters should be requested.  By setting it to BACKWARD_PRE, the next FSDP's unit params can begin to be requested and arrive sooner before the computation of the current unit starts. This overlaps the all_gather communication and gradinet computation and can speedup the training speed in exchange for slightly higher memory consumption. It can be utilized in the FSDP wrapper in 2.4 as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The backward prefetch setting controls the timing of when the next FSDP unit's parameters should be requested.  By setting it to `BACKWARD_PRE`, the next FSDP's unit params can begin to be requested and arrive sooner before the computation of the current unit starts. This overlaps the `all_gather` communication and gradient computation which can increase the training speed in exchange for slightly higher memory consumption. It can be utilized in the FSDP wrapper in 2.4 as follows:
```

.. code-block:: python

    torch.cuda.set_device(local_rank)

     model = FSDP(model,
            auto_wrap_policy=t5_auto_wrap_policy,
            mixed_precision=bfSixteen,
            device_id=torch.cuda.current_device(),
            backward_prefetch = BackwardPrefetch.BACKWARD_PRE)
            

> It has two settings, BACKWARD_PRE and BACKWARD_POST, where BACKWARD_POST is the default.  BACKWARD_POST means that the next FSDP unit's params will not be requested until the current FSDP unit processing is complete, this minimizing memory overhead.  In some cases, using BACKWARD_PRE can increase model training speed from 2-10%, with the higher speedups noted for larger models. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`backward_prefetch` has two modes, `BACKWARD_PRE` and `BACKWARD_POST`, where `BACKWARD_POST` is the default.  `BACKWARD_POST` means that the next FSDP unit's params will not be requested until the current FSDP unit processing is complete, this minimizing memory overhead.  In some cases, using `BACKWARD_PRE` can increase model training speed up to 2-10%, with even higher speed improvements noted for larger models. 
```

Model Checkpoint Saving, by streaming to the Rank0 CPU

> --------------

Reviewer: --- needs to be as long as the heading

> `backward_prefetch` has two modes, `BACKWARD_PRE` and `BACKWARD_POST`, where `BACKWARD_POST` is the default.  `BACKWARD_POST` means that the next FSDP unit's params will not be requested until the current FSDP unit processing is complete, this minimizing memory overhead.  In some cases, using `BACKWARD_PRE` can increase model training speed up to 2-10%, with even higher speed improvements noted for larger models. 

Reviewer 2: I don't think BACKWARD_POST is the default, the default is None, and the user must set either PRE or POST?

> `backward_prefetch` has two modes, `BACKWARD_PRE` and `BACKWARD_POST`, where `BACKWARD_POST` is the default.  `BACKWARD_POST` means that the next FSDP unit's params will not be requested until the current FSDP unit processing is complete, this minimizing memory overhead.  In some cases, using `BACKWARD_PRE` can increase model training speed up to 2-10%, with even higher speed improvements noted for larger models. 

Reviewer 2: "this minimizing memory overhead" -> thus minimizing memory overhead

> To save the model checkpoints during or at the end of the training, 1.12 offers the ability to save model checkpoints by having all ranks (GPU's) send their owned params to the rank0 GPU, which then streams these arriving shards to it's CPU for full model assembly.  This avoids potential OOM for models that are larger than a single GPU memory.   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To save the model checkpoints during or at the end of the training, PyTorch 1.12 or later offers the ability to save model checkpoints by having all ranks (GPU's) send their owned params to the rank0 GPU, which then streams these arriving shards to it's CPU for full model assembly.  This avoids potential OOM for models that are larger than a single GPU memory.   
```

> To save the model checkpoints during or at the end of the training, PyTorch 1.12 or later offers the ability to save model checkpoints by having all ranks (GPU's) send their owned params to the rank0 GPU, which then streams these arriving shards to it's CPU for full model assembly.  This avoids potential OOM for models that are larger than a single GPU memory.   

Author: Thanks @rohan-varma!

The full model state dict is then assembled in CPU memory and can be saved to disk. 

This feature can be run as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    save_policy = FullStateDictConfig(offload_to_cpu=True, rank0_only=True)
    with FSDP.state_dict_type(
                model, StateDictType.FULL_STATE_DICT, save_policy
            ):
                cpu_state = model.state_dict()
    if rank == 0:
     save_name = file_save_name + "-" + time_of_run + "-" + currEpoch
     torch.save(cpu_state, save_name)

> Summary:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Summary
```

* Shard model parameters and each rank only keeps its own shard

*In forward pass*

* Run `all_gather` to collect all shards from all ranks to recover the full parameter for this FSDP unit
* Run forward computation
* Discard non-owned parameter shards it has just collected to free memory

*In backward pass*

* Run `all_gather` to collect all shards from all ranks to recover the full parameter in this FSDP unit
* Run backward computation
* Discard non-owned parameters to free memory. 
* Run reduce_scatter to sync gradients

Fine-tuning HF T5
-----------------
HF T5 pre-trained models are available in four different sizes, ranging from small with 60 Million parameters to XXL with 11 Billion parameters. In this tutorial, we demonstrate the fine-tuning of a T5 3B with FSDP for text summarization using WikiHow dataset.
The main focus of this tutorial is to highlight different available features in FSDP that are helpful for training large scale model above 3B parameters. Also, we cover specific features for Transformer based models. The code for this tutorial is available in  `Pytorch Examples <https://github.com/HamidShojanazeri/examples/tree/FSDP_example/FSDP/>`__.

*Setup*

> 1.1 Install Pytorch 1.12 

Reviewer 2: nit: it says 1.12 but looks like it installs nightly

.. code-block:: bash 

    pip3 install --pre torch torchvision torchaudio -f https://download.pytorch.org/whl/nightly/cu113/torch_nightly.html

1.2 Dataset Setup

Please create a `data` folder, download the WikiHow dataset from `wikihowAll.csv <https://ucsb.app.box.com/s/ap23l8gafpezf4tq3wapr6u8241zz358>`__  and `wikihowSep.cs <https://ucsb.app.box.com/s/7yq601ijl1lzvlfu4rjdbbxforzd2oag>`__, and place them in the `data` folder. 
We will use the wikihow dataset from  `summarization_dataset <https://github.com/HamidShojanazeri/examples/blob/FSDP_example/FSDP/summarization_dataset.py>`__.

> Next, we add the following code snippets to a Python script “T5_training.py”.  Note - The full source code for this tutorial is available in `PyTorch examples <https://github.com/HamidShojanazeri/examples/tree/FSDP_example/FSDP>`__ 

Reviewer 2: add a period at the end

Also, have we made sure the source here is in sync with this tutorial and runs without errors?

Author: yes, the code has been tested and just made final sync here.

1.3  Import necessary packages:

.. code-block:: python

>     import os

Reviewer 2: can we confirm end to end code runs and works as expected if this code snippet is copy pasted with all necessary deps?

Author: yes, I just made sure, that it is sync with code [here](https://github.com/HamidShojanazeri/examples/blob/FSDP_example/FSDP/T5_training.py).

    import argparse
    import torch
    import torch.nn as nn

>     import torch.nn.functional as F

Reviewer 2: unused I think. pls check other imports as well

    import torch.optim as optim
    from transformers import T5Tokenizer, T5ForConditionalGeneration
    import functools
    from torch.optim.lr_scheduler import StepLR
    import torch.nn.functional as F
    import torch.distributed as dist

>     import torch.multiprocessing as mp

Reviewer 2: unused

    from torch.nn.parallel import DistributedDataParallel as DDP
    from torch.utils.data.distributed import DistributedSampler

>     from torch.distributed.fsdp.fully_sharded_data_parallel import (

Reviewer 2: SHardingStrategy is not imported

        FullyShardedDataParallel as FSDP,

>         CPUOffload,

Reviewer 2: this import looks unused

>         BackwardPrefetch,

Reviewer 2: MixedPrecision needs to be imported?

    )
    from torch.distributed.fsdp.wrap import (
    transformer_auto_wrap_policy,
    enable_wrap,
    wrap,
    )
    from torch.utils.data import DataLoader
    from pathlib import Path
    from summerization_dataset import *
    from transformers.models.t5.modeling_t5 import T5Block
    from typing import Type

1.4 Distributed training setup. 
Here we use two helper functions to initialize the processes for distributed training,  and then to clean up after training completion.

> In this tutorial, we are going to use torch elastic, using `torchrun <https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/elastic/run.html>`__ , which will set the worker `RANK` and `WORLD_SIZE` automatically.

Reviewer 2: torch elastic -> TorchElastic

also, there is an extra space before the ","

> In this tutorial, we are going to use torch elastic, using `torchrun <https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/elastic/run.html>`__ , which will set the worker `RANK` and `WORLD_SIZE` automatically.

Reviewer 2: does it also set LOCAL_RANK - I believe it does, so let's add that as well?

                fsdp_loss[0] += output["loss"].item()  # sum up batch loss
                pred = output["logits"].argmax(dim=1, keepdim=True)  # get the index of the max log-probability

                fsdp_loss[1] += pred.eq(batch["target_ids"].view_as(pred)).sum().item()
                fsdp_loss[2] += len(batch)

        dist.all_reduce(fsdp_loss, op=dist.ReduceOp.SUM)

        if rank == 0:
            val_loss = fsdp_loss[0] / fsdp_loss[2]
            print(f"Validation Loss: {val_loss:.4f}")
        return val_loss

2.4 Define a distributed train function that wraps the model in FSDP:

.. code-block:: python

    
    def fsdp_main(args):

        model, tokenizer = setup_model("t5-large")

        local_rank = int(os.environ['LOCAL_RANK'])
        rank = int(os.environ['RANK'])
        world_size = int(os.environ['WORLD_SIZE'])

        dataset = load_dataset('wikihow', 'all', data_dir='data/')
        print(dataset.keys())
        print("Size of train dataset: ", dataset['train'].shape)
        print("Size of Validation dataset: ", dataset['validation'].shape)

>         # tokenizer = T5Tokenizer.from_pretrained('t5-small')

Reviewer 2: rm commented out code - but also, why is it commented out? looks used?

        train_dataset = wikihow(tokenizer, 'train', None, 512, 150, True)
        val_dataset = wikihow(tokenizer, 'validation', None, 512, 150, True)
    
        sampler1 = DistributedSampler(train_dataset, rank=rank, num_replicas=world_size, shuffle=True)

>         sampler2 = DistributedSampler(val_dataset, rank=rank, num_replicas=world_size)

Reviewer 2: name them train_sampler, val_sampelr?

        setup()

        train_kwargs = {'batch_size': args.batch_size, 'sampler': sampler1}
        test_kwargs = {'batch_size': args.test_batch_size, 'sampler': sampler2}
        cuda_kwargs = {'num_workers': 2,
                        'pin_memory': True,
                        'shuffle': False}
        train_kwargs.update(cuda_kwargs)
        test_kwargs.update(cuda_kwargs)

        train_loader = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(train_dataset,**train_kwargs)
        val_loader = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(val_dataset, **test_kwargs)
        
        t5_auto_wrap_policy = functools.partial(
            transformer_auto_wrap_policy,
            transformer_layer_cls={
                T5Block,
            },
        )

        sharding_strategy: ShardingStrategy = ShardingStrategy.FULL_SHARD
        torch.cuda.set_device(local_rank)
    
    
        init_start_event = torch.cuda.Event(enable_timing=True)
        init_end_event = torch.cuda.Event(enable_timing=True)

        init_start_event.record()

    

>         model = FSDP(model,

Reviewer 2: add a comment mentioning model is on CPU before input to FSDP

            auto_wrap_policy=t5_auto_wrap_policy, # specifies the auto_wrap policy
            mixed_precision=bfSixteen, # specifies the mixed percision policy
            sharding_strategy=sharding_strategy, # specifies the sharding strategy
            device_id=torch.cuda.current_device()) # set the model intialization to stream layers on GPU to avoid OOM
            
        # Model wrapping can be observed simply via print()
        print(model)
        optimizer = optim.Adadelta(model.parameters(), lr=args.lr)

        scheduler = StepLR(optimizer, step_size=1, gamma=args.gamma)
        best_val_loss = float("inf")
        curr_val_loss = float("inf")
        file_save_name = "3B-model-"

        if rank == 0:
            time_of_run = get_date_of_run()
            dur = []
            train_acc_tracking = []
            val_acc_tracking = []
            training_start_time = time.time()

        if rank == 0 and args.track_memory:

>             fn = "memory_tracking.txt"

Reviewer 2: what is the purpose of this fn?

            mem_alloc_tracker = []
            mem_reserved_tracker = []

        for epoch in range(1, args.epochs + 1):
            t0 = time.time()
            train_accuracy = train(args, model, rank, world_size, train_loader, optimizer, epoch, sampler=sampler1)
            if args.run_validation:
                curr_val_loss = validation(model, rank, world_size, val_loader)
            scheduler.step()
            
            if rank == 0:

                print(f"--> epoch {epoch} completed...entering save and stats zone")

                dur.append(time.time() - t0)
                train_acc_tracking.append(train_accuracy.item())

                if args.run_validation:
                    val_acc_tracking.append(curr_val_loss.item())

                if args.track_memory:
                    mem_alloc_tracker.append(

>                         format_metrics_to_gb(torch.cuda.memory_allocated())

Reviewer 2: I don't think this function exists anywhere?

                    )

>                     mem_reserved_tracker.append(

Reviewer 2: I see these fields populated, but not used anywhere. let's just omit?

                        help='For Saving the current Model')
    args = parser.parse_args()

    torch.manual_seed(args.seed)
    
    fsdp_main(args)

To run the the training using torchrun:

.. code-block:: bash 

    torchrun --nnodes 1 --nproc_per_node 4  T5_training.py

.. _transformer_wrapping_policy:
Transformer Wrapping Policy
---------------------------
As discussed in the `previous tutorial <https://pytorch.org/tutorials/intermediate/FSDP_tutorial.html>`__, auto_wrap_policy is one of the FSDP features that make it easy to automatically shard a given model and put the model, optimizer and gradient shards into distinct FSDP units.

For some architectures such as Transformer encoder-decoders, some parts of the model such as embedding table is being shared with both encoder and decoder.
In this case, we need to place the embedding table in the outer FSDP unit so that it could be accessed from both encoder and decoder.  In addition, by registering the layer class for a transformer, the sharding plan can be made much more communication efficient.  In PyTorch 1.12, FSDP added this support and now we have a wrapping policy for transfomers.

> It can be created as follows, where the T5Block represents the T5 transformer layer class (holding MHSA and FFN).  

Reviewer 2: Add "Note that this policy's flexibility allows users to specify arbitrary layers as input into transformer_layer_cls, allowing general module type based-wrapping.

.. code-block:: python

    t5_auto_wrap_policy = functools.partial(
            transformer_auto_wrap_policy,
            transformer_layer_cls={
                T5Block,
            },
        )
    torch.cuda.set_device(local_rank)
  

    model = FSDP(model,
        fsdp_auto_wrap_policy=t5_auto_wrap_policy)

To see the wrapped model, you can easily print the model and visually inspect the sharding and FSDP units as well.

Mixed Precision
---------------

> FSDP supports training with mixed precision any combination of FP16 and BFloat16 and FP32. Currently BFloat16 is only available on Ampere GPUs, so you need to confirm native support before you use it. On V100s for example, BFloat16 can still be run but due to it running non-natively, it can result in significant slowdowns.

Reviewer 2: change first sentence to 

FSDP supports flexible mixed precision training allowing for arbitrary reduced precision types (such as fp16 or bfloat16).

To check if BFloat16 is natively supported, you can use the following :

.. code-block:: python
    
    bf16_ready = (
        torch.version.cuda
        and torch.cuda.is_bf16_supported() 
        and LooseVersion(torch.version.cuda) >= "11.0"
        and dist.is_nccl_available()
        and nccl.version() >= (2, 10)
    )

> One of the advantages of mixed percision in FSDP is providing granular control over different precision levels for parameters, gradients, and buffers as follows:

Reviewer 2: mention that if a certain type (param, reduce, buffer) is not specified, they will not be casted at all

.. code-block:: python

    fpSixteen = MixedPrecision(
        param_dtype=torch.float16,
        # Gradient communication precision.
        reduce_dtype=torch.float16,
        # Buffer precision.
        buffer_dtype=torch.float16,
    )

    bfSixteen = MixedPrecision(
        param_dtype=torch.bfloat16,
        # Gradient communication precision.
        reduce_dtype=torch.bfloat16,
        # Buffer precision.
        buffer_dtype=torch.bfloat16,
    )

    fp32_policy = MixedPrecision(
        param_dtype=torch.float32,
        # Gradient communication precision.
        reduce_dtype=torch.float32,
        # Buffer precision.
        buffer_dtype=torch.float32,
    )

> 

Reviewer 2: Add the following:

This flexibility allows users fine grained control, such as only setting gradient communication to happen in reduced precision, and all parameters / buffer computation to be done in full precision. This is potentially useful in cases where intra-node communication is the main bottleneck and parameters / buffers must be in full precision to avoid accuracy issues. This can be done with the following policy:

```
grad_bf16 = MixedPrecision(reduce_dtype=torch.bfloat16)
```

In 2.4 we just add the relevant mixed precision policy to the FSDP wrapper:

.. code-block:: python

     model = FSDP(model,
            auto_wrap_policy=t5_auto_wrap_policy,
            mixed_precision=bfSixteen)

In our experiments, we have observed up to 4x speed up by using BFloat16 for training and memory reduction of approximately 30% in some experiments that can be used for batch size increases.

Intializing FSDP Model on Device
--------------------------------

> While there are multiple ways to initialize your model in FSDP, with 1.12 we have an optimal method for initializing most models by streaming the model layers onto the GPU to avoid any OOM issues, while at the same time leveraging the speed of the GPU to initialize many times faster vs on CPU, device_id moves the model from CPU to GPU:

Reviewer 2: this sort of implies there would be OOM if we didn't do this, which is not really the case - we can probably just omit that part. 

Another way to write this:

In 1.12, FSDP supports a `device_id` argument meant to initialize input CPU module on the device given by `device_id`. This is useful when the entire model does not fit on a single GPU, but fits in a host's CPU memory. When `device_id` is specified, FSDP will move the model to the specified device on a per-FSDP unit basis, avoiding GPU OOM issues while initializing several times faster than CPU-based initialization.

.. code-block:: python

    torch.cuda.set_device(local_rank)

     model = FSDP(model,
            auto_wrap_policy=t5_auto_wrap_policy,
            mixed_precision=bfSixteen,
            device_id=torch.cuda.current_device())
     

    
Sharding Strategy
-----------------
FSDP sharding strategy by default is set to fully shard the model parameters, gradients and optimizer states get sharded across all ranks. (also termed Zero3 sharding). In case you are interested to have Zero2 sharding strategy, where only optimizer states and gradients are sharded, FSDP support this feature by passing the Sharding strategy by using  "ShardingStrategy.SHARD_GRAD_OP", instead of "ShardingStrategy.FULL_SHARD" to the FSDP initialization  as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    torch.cuda.set_device(local_rank)

     model = FSDP(model,
            auto_wrap_policy=t5_auto_wrap_policy,
            mixed_precision=bfSixteen,
            device_id=torch.cuda.current_device(),

>             sharding_strategy=ShardingStrategy.SHARD_GRAD_OP # FULL_SHARD)

Reviewer 3: sharding_strategy=ShardingStrategy.SHARD_GRAD_OP # ZERO2

Reviewer: Thanks for the feedback! This is fixed by https://github.com/pytorch/tutorials/pull/1969
